docs(tutorial): add part 4 (#31645)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/tutorial/part-4/index.mdx

In this part, you'll learn about how Gatsby pulls data into your site.

By the end of this part of the Tutorial, you will be able to:

- Use **GraphiQL** to build your own GraphQL queries.
- Create a **page query** to pull data into a page component.
- Use the **`useStaticQuery`** hook to pull data into a "building-block" component.
- Use the **`gatsby-source-filesystem`** plugin to pull data into your site from your local file system.
- Create an **MDX** file with front matter.

## Meet Gatsby's GraphQL data layer

One of the really powerful features of Gatsby is that you can pull data into your site from anywhere. For example, you might want to store your blog content in WordPress and your products in Shopify. With Gatsby, you can use the best tool for each type of data in your site.

But how does this work under the hood? Gatsby has its own GraphQL **data layer** where it keeps all the data for your site. You can add special plugins to your site called **source** plugins. When you build your site, each source plugin will pull data from a particular place into the GraphQL data layer for your site.

> There are different source plugins for a variety of different data sources. You can find source plugins for your file system, several different content management systems (CMSs), private APIs, or databases.

Reviewer: Maybe link to our plugin search here?

</Announcement>

## Use GraphiQL to explore the data layer and write GraphQL queries

How do you know what data is in your site's GraphQL data layer? When you run your site in develop mode, Gatsby automatically creates a special endpoint that lets you use **GraphiQL**. GraphiQL is an in-browser tool that you can use to explore your site's data and build GraphQL queries.

You can view GraphiQL by going to `http://localhost:8000/___graphql` in your browser. (That's three underscores in the URL.)

![A screenshot of the GraphiQL interface in a web browser. It has three main sections: the Explorer, the Query Editor, and the Result Window.](./graphiql.png)

There are three main sections of the GraphiQL interface:

* **Explorer:** This shows you all the different kinds of data you can request in a GraphQL query.
    * You can toggle the dropdowns to expand the different fields and see what kinds of data is available in the data layer.
* **Query Editor:** This is the middle section, which you can use to write out a query to test.

>     * You can add fields to your query by checking the boxes for different fields in the Explorer pane. Or, if you'd prefer, you can type the fields directly into the Query Editor.

Reviewer: Maybe add that it has autocompletion with Ctrl + Space?

Author: Pro tip! I didn't even know you could do that 👏

1. Use GraphiQL to design a query that responds with the data you want from the data layer.
1. Add the query into your component.
    * Use page queries for page components.
    * Use `useStaticQuery` for "building block" components.
1. Use the data from the response in your component.

</Collapsible>

## Pull the site title into the `Layout` component

### Task: Use GraphiQL to build the query

### Task: Use `useStaticQuery` to pull the site title into the `Layout` component

https://github.com/meganesu/gatsby-intro-workshop-example-site-with-v3/commit/83996e21e5b60d5684c6212065466e2291ae3931

You've seen how to use GraphiQL to write queries. But how do you actually use those queries inside your JavaScript files? The approach looks slightly different depending on whether you're trying to pull data into a page component or a building-block component.

You'll try pulling data into a building-block component first. To do that, you'll need to use a pre-defined function from Gatsby: `useStaticQuery`.

Key Gatsby Concept: Introduce `useStaticQuery`.

Follow the steps below to use `useStaticQuery` to pull in the site title from your site metadata into your `Layout` component.

> 1. Import useStaticQuery and graphql from gatsby

Reviewer: Maybe something more like this?

```suggestion
1. Add imports to top of your file: `import { useStaticQuery, graphql } from "gatsby"`
```

> 1. Paste the query from GraphiQL into useStaticQuery

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Paste the query from GraphiQL into `useStaticQuery`
```

import { MdInfo } from 'react-icons/md'

<Notification
  Icon={MdInfo}
  tone="WARNING"
  variant="SECONDARY"
  content={
    <div>
      <p>
        <strong>Note:</strong> We{"'"}re still working on updating this Tutorial to use Gatsby v3.
        The first few parts of the new Tutorial have been released here, and subsequent parts
        will be added as we finish them.
      </p>
      <p style={{ marginBottom: 0 }}>
        If you{"'"}re looking for a full experience in the meantime, you can check out the (slightly outdated){" "}
        <a href="https://v2.gatsbyjs.com/docs/tutorial/">
          <strong>Gatsby v2 Tutorial</strong>
        </a>
        .
      </p>
    </div>
  }
/>

## Introduction

Parts 4 and 5 of this Tutorial are all about data!

So far, you've been writing text and adding images directly in your React components. That's an excellent way to build many websites! But often it's easier to create and maintain data somewhere else - like a folder of Markdown files or a content management system (CMS) - and then pull it into your components as needed. That way, you can make updates to your content without affecting the code for your site.

> Conveniently, Gatsby has a powerful feature called the **data layer** that you can use to pull data into your site from anywhere. Want to keep your blog posts in WordPress, your store products in Shopify, and your user data in AirTable? No problem! With Gatsby's data layer, you can combine data from multiple sources, which lets you choose the best platform for each type of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conveniently, Gatsby has a powerful feature called the **data layer** that you can use to pull data into your site from anywhere. Want to keep your blog posts in WordPress, your store products in Shopify, and your user data in Airtable? No problem! With Gatsby's data layer, you can combine data from multiple sources, which lets you choose the best platform for each type of data.
```

Checking their website they don't pascalcase it

> Conveniently, Gatsby has a powerful feature called the **data layer** that you can use to pull data into your site from anywhere. Want to keep your blog posts in WordPress, your store products in Shopify, and your user data in AirTable? No problem! With Gatsby's data layer, you can combine data from multiple sources, which lets you choose the best platform for each type of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conveniently, Gatsby has a powerful feature called the **data layer** that you can use to pull data into your site from anywhere. Want to keep your blog posts in WordPress, your store products in Shopify, and your user data in Airtable? No problem! With Gatsby's data layer, you can combine data from multiple sources, which lets you choose the best platform for each type of data.
```

Checking their website they don't pascalcase it

Author: Today *I* learned! :) Good catch!

</Announcement>

In this part of the Tutorial, you'll learn about how to add data to Gatsby's data layer and how to pull that data into your React components.

By the end of this part of the Tutorial, you will be able to:

- Use **GraphiQL** to explore the data in the data layer and build your own GraphQL queries.
- Use the **`useStaticQuery`** hook to pull data into a "building-block" component.
- Use the **`gatsby-source-filesystem`** plugin to pull data into your site from your computer's filesystem.
- Create a **page query** to pull data into a page component.

## Meet Gatsby's GraphQL data layer

Gatsby has its own [GraphQL](https://graphql.org/) data layer where it keeps all the data for your site. But how does it work under the hood?

First, your data is stored in one or more **sources**. That source might be a folder on your computer's filesystem, a content management system (CMS) like WordPress, or a database. You might even have multiple data sources!

> How do you get from its source into the data layer? By adding special plugins to your site called **source plugins**. Each source plugin is designed to communicate with a specific source. When you build your site, each source plugin pulls data from its particular source and adds it to the GraphQL data layer for your site.

Reviewer: I personally wouldn't say that source plugins are "special". I'd argue that themes are "special" because they are technically plugins but are used a little bit different than source plugins, transformer plugins

Author: Hmm good point. Thanks!

```suggestion
How do you get from its source into the data layer? By adding a type of plugin to your site called a **source plugin**. Each source plugin is designed to communicate with a specific source. When you build your site, each source plugin pulls data from its particular source and adds it to the GraphQL data layer for your site.
```

<Announcement style={{marginBottom: "1.5rem"}}>

**Tip:** Curious what source plugins are in the [Plugin Library](/plugins/)? You can identify source plugins by their name: they typically start with `gatsby-source-`.

For example, a few popular source plugins are `gatsby-source-filesystem` and `gatsby-source-contentful`.

</Announcement>

> How do you get data back out of the data layer? You can write **GraphQL queries** inside of your components to pull out the data you want to use in your site. When you build your site, Gatsby will find all the GraphQL queries in your components, run them, and pass the resulting data into your component as a `data` prop.

Reviewer: Technically this is only true for components/files inside `src/pages/` folder as you can do page queries there. Maybe make the last sentence more generic (without the `data` prop) so that it's true for both page queries and static queries

Author: Ah, good catch!

```suggestion
How do you get data back out of the data layer? You can write **GraphQL queries** inside of your components to pull out the data you want to use in your site. When you build your site, Gatsby will find all the GraphQL queries in your components, run them, and put the resulting data in your component.
```

![A diagram showing how data flows into and out of the GraphQL data layer. Source plugins pull data out of a particular data source and into the data layer for your site. GraphQL queries to pull data out of the data layer and into your React components.](./data-layer.png)

## Use GraphiQL to explore the data layer and write GraphQL queries

How do you know what data is in your site's GraphQL data layer? When you start the local development server for your site, Gatsby automatically creates a special endpoint that lets you use an in-browser tool called **GraphiQL**. With GraphiQL, you can explore your site's data and build GraphQL queries.

Follow the steps below to open the GraphiQL interface:

1. Start up your local development server by running `gatsby develop`.
1. In a web browser, go to `http://localhost:8000/___graphql`. (That's three underscores in the URL.)

![A screenshot of the GraphiQL interface in a web browser. It has three main sections: the Explorer, the Query Editor, and the Result Window.](./graphiql.png)

<Collapsible
  summary={<h3>A closer look at the GraphiQL interface</h3>}
>

> There are three main sections of the GraphiQL interface:

Reviewer: As a cherry on top maybe also explain Prettify, History, and Code Exporter?

Author: Oh neat I've never actually clicked any of those buttons! 😂 I'll add a clean-up story to add it after this PR, since I'll have to do some new writing.

`useStaticQuery` takes one parameter: a templated string of the GraphQL query you want to run. It returns the requested data, which you can store in a variable and then use throughout your component.

Here's a brief outline of the process for adding `useStaticQuery` to pull data into your building-block components:

1. Import the `useStaticQuery` hook and the `graphql` tag from the `gatsby` package.
    * The `graphql` tag is something called a [tagged template literal](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals#tagged_templates). Basically, the `graphql` tag tells Gatsby that the string following it is a GraphQL query, so then Gatsby can parse and run it.
    ```js
    import { useStaticQuery, graphql } from 'gatsby'
    ```
2. Inside your component, call `useStaticQuery` using the `graphql` template tag and your query from GraphiQL. Store the results in a new variable so that you can use it later in your component.
    ```js
    const data = useStaticQuery(graphql`
      // Copy-paste your query from GraphiQL here

>       // Change the name of the query to something unique (instead of the default "MyQuery")

Reviewer: See below, we can skip the name entirely

>       // Copy-paste your query from GraphiQL here
>       // Change the name of the query to something unique (instead of the default "MyQuery")

Author: ```suggestion
      // Copy-paste your query from GraphiQL here, and delete the query name "MyQuery"
```

    `)
    ```
3. Use the data in your component by using the dot operator (`.`) to access the appropriate field off the response.

Here's a small example to show what this process looks like in practice:

```js:title=src/components/header.js
import * as React from 'react'

// highlight-start
// Step 1: Import the useStaticQuery hook and graphql tag
import { useStaticQuery, graphql } from 'gatsby'
// highlight-end

const Header = () => {
  // highlight-start
  /* Step 2: Use the useStaticQuery hook and
    graphql tag to query for data
    (The query gets run at build time) */
  const data = useStaticQuery(graphql`

>     query HeaderQuery {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    query {
```

Without a name is better as people forget to rename stuff

      {/* highlight-end */}
    </header>
  )
}

export default Header
```

<Announcement style={{marginBottom: "1.5rem"}}>

**Note:** You can only call `useStaticQuery` once per file. If you need multiple fields, you can add them all into a single query.

For example, if you need data from both the `site` field and the `siteBuildMetadata` field, you could make the following call to `useStaticQuery`:

```js
const data = useStaticQuery(graphql`
  query HeaderQuery {
    site {
      siteMetadata {
        title
      }
    }
    siteBuildMetadata {
      buildTime
    }
  }
`)
```
</Announcement>

</Collapsible>

Follow the steps below to use `useStaticQuery` to pull in the site title from your site metadata into your `Layout` component.

1. Import the `useStaticQuery` function and the `graphql` tag from the Gatsby package.

```js:title=src/components/layout.js
import * as React from 'react'
import { Link, useStaticQuery, graphql } from 'gatsby' // highlight-line
import {
  container,
  heading,
  navLinks,
  navLinkItem,
  navLinkText
} from './layout.module.css'

const Layout = ({ pageTitle, children }) => {
  return (
    // ...
  )
}

export default Layout
```

> 2. Call `useStaticQuery` and pass it the query you created in GraphiQL. Be sure to use the `graphiql` tag so Gatsby knows that the string you're passing in is a GraphQL query. Store the return value from `useStaticQuery` in a variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Call `useStaticQuery` and pass it the query you created in GraphiQL. Be sure to use the `graphql` tag so Gatsby knows that the string you're passing in is a GraphQL query. Store the return value from `useStaticQuery` in a variable.
```

<Announcement style={{marginBottom: "1.5rem"}}>

> **Note:** Query names need to be unique, so update the default from `MyQuery` to something more descriptive.

Reviewer: see above, we can skip this

</Announcement>

```js:title=src/components/layout.js
import * as React from 'react'
import { Link, useStaticQuery, graphql } from 'gatsby'
import {
  container,
  heading,
  navLinks,
  navLinkItem,
  navLinkText
} from './layout.module.css'

const Layout = ({ pageTitle, children }) => {
  // highlight-start
  const data = useStaticQuery(graphql`

>     query LayoutQuery {

Reviewer: ^

Author: ```suggestion
    query {
```

So if your GraphiQL Result Window showed this:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "site": {
      "siteMetadata": {
        "title": "My First Gatsby Site"
      }
    }
  },
  "extensions": {}
}
```

then your `data` variable will have the following structure:

```js
{
  "site": {
    "siteMetadata": {
      "title": "My First Gatsby Site"
    }
  }
}
```

</Announcement>

3. Now that you have a variable with the results of your query, you can render the title of your site in the JSX for your `Layout` component. To access the site title, use the JavaScript dot operator (`.`) to get the value of `data.site.siteMetadata.title`. Add it so it appears in both the browser tab and at the top of your page content.

```js:title=src/components/layout.js
import * as React from 'react'
import { Link, useStaticQuery, graphql } from 'gatsby'
import {
  container,
  heading,
  navLinks,
  navLinkItem,
  navLinkText
} from './layout.module.css'

const Layout = ({ pageTitle, children }) => {
  const data = useStaticQuery(graphql`

>     query LayoutQuery {

Reviewer: ^

          </li>
        </ul>
      </nav>
      <h1 className={heading}>{pageTitle}</h1>
      {children}
    </main>
  )
}

export default Layout
```

![A screenshot of the home page in a web browser. The title of the page in the browser tab now says, "Home Page | My First Gatsby Site", and the top of the page has an unstyled paragraph that says, "My First Gatsby Site".](./index-page-with-site-title.png)

4. Now that the site title is showing up on the page, it's time to add some style! Define some styles for the site title below the existing styles in your `layout.module.css` file.

```css:title=src/components/layout.module.css
/* ... your existing styles */

.site-title {
  font-size: 3rem;
  color: gray;
  font-weight: 700;
}
```

5. Import your new styles into your `Layout` component and apply them to the site title paragraph you added.

```js:title=src/components/layout.js
import * as React from 'react'
import { Link, useStaticQuery, graphql } from 'gatsby'
import {
  container,
  heading,
  navLinks,
  navLinkItem,
  navLinkText,
  siteTitle, // highlight-line
} from './layout.module.css'

const Layout = ({ pageTitle, children }) => {
  const data = useStaticQuery(graphql`

>     query LayoutQuery {

Reviewer: ^

Author: ```suggestion
    query {
```

      site {
        siteMetadata {
          title
        }
      }
    }  
  `)
  
  return (
    <main className={container}>
      <title>{pageTitle} | {data.site.siteMetadata.title}</title>
      {/* highlight-next-line */}
      <p className={siteTitle}>{data.site.siteMetadata.title}</p>
      <nav>
        <ul className={navLinks}>
          <li className={navLinkItem}>
            <Link to="/" className={navLinkText}>
              Home
            </Link>
          </li>
          <li className={navLinkItem}>
            <Link to="/about" className={navLinkText}>
              About
            </Link>
          </li>
        </ul>
      </nav>
      <h1 className={heading}>{pageTitle}</h1>
      {children}
    </main>
  )
}

export default Layout
```

> Reload your browser to see your new styles applied to your site title.

Reviewer: In theory this should hot-reload?

Author: Good point. Tweaked the wording to hopefully convey that it should happen automatically.

```suggestion
When your browser reloads, you should see your new styles applied to your site title.
```

![A screenshot of the home page in a web browser. Now the site title paragraph is styled to be larger and gray.](./index-page-with-site-title-styled.png)

> Congratulations, you've just used GraphQL to pull data into your site! Try changing the site title in your `gatsby-config.js` file and see your site update in the browser.

Reviewer: The dev server would need to restart for this

Author: Hm when I just tried it, the changes got picked up without needing a restart 🤷‍♀️

Eventually, your blog page will link to separate pages for each of your posts. But there's a lot to learn to achieve that, so you'll be working up to that goal over the next few parts of the Tutorial (Parts 4, 5, and 6).

In this part, you'll create a blog page that lists the filenames for your posts.

### Task: Create a new blog page

Start by setting up the skeleton for your new blog page component.

1. Create a new file: `src/pages/blog.js`. Define and export a new page component for your blog page. Use your existing `Layout` component to add some basic structure.

```js:title=src/pages/blog.js
import * as React from 'react'
import Layout from '../components/layout'

const BlogPage = () => {
  return (
    <Layout pageTitle="My Blog Posts">
      <p>My cool posts will go in here</p>
    </Layout>
  )
}

export default BlogPage
```

2. Add a link to your new blog page to the navigation bar in your `Layout` component:

```js:title=src/components/layout.js
// ... import statements

const Layout = ({ pageTitle, children }) => {
  const data = useStaticQuery(graphql`

>     query LayoutQuery {

Reviewer: ^

Author: ```suggestion
    query {
```

      </nav>
      <h1 className={heading}>{pageTitle}</h1>
      {children}
    </main>
  )
}

export default Layout
```

3. Now, if you go to `localhost:8000/blog` in your web browser, you should see your new blog page skeleton, and there should be a link to the blog page in your navigation bar.

![A screenshot of the blog page in a web browser.](./blog-page-skeleton.png)

### Task: Create some MDX blog posts

Now that you have a blog page, it's time to create some blog posts! For your site, you'll store each blog post as a separate file inside of a folder in your project.

1. Create a new directory called `blog` at the top level of your project folder.

2. Create three new files in the `blog` directory: one for each post. It doesn't matter what you name them, as long as they end with the `.mdx` extension. (You'll learn more about the powers of MDX in Part 5.) You can leave the files empty for now.

![A screenshot of the VS Code Explorer pane. There's a new top-level directory called "blog", which contains three new files: "another-post.mdx", "my-first-post.mdx", and "yet-another-post.mdx".](./blog-posts-folder-structure.png)

### Task: Use GraphiQL to build the query

> Now that you have some posts saved to your local filesystem, it's time to pull those files into the Gatsby data layer. To do that, you'll use a special plugin called `gatsby-source-filesystem`.

Reviewer: Again, drop the "special"?

Author: ```suggestion
Now that you have some posts saved to your local filesystem, it's time to pull those files into the Gatsby data layer. To do that, you'll use a plugin called `gatsby-source-filesystem`.
```

<Collapsible
  summary={<h4>Key Gatsby Concept: Pulling data into page components with page queries</h4>}
>

The process for making a query in a page component looks slightly different from `useStaticQuery`:

1. Import the `graphql` tag from the Gatsby package.
2. Export a variable that stores a templated string with the GraphQL query you want to run.
    * When your site gets built, Gatsby will run your page query and pass the resulting data into your page component as a prop called `data`.
    * Your page query needs to be defined outside of your page component. (With `useStaticQuery`, your query was defined inside your component.)
3. Use the `data` prop in your page component, as needed. You can use the JavaScript dot operator (`.`) to choose fields off of the `data` prop.

Here's a small example to show what this process looks like in practice:

```javascript
import * as React from 'react'

// Step 1: Import the graphql tag
import { graphql } from 'gatsby'

const HomePage = ({ data }) => {
  return (
    <p>
      { /* Step 3: Use the data in your component*/ }
      { data.site.siteMetadata.description }
    </p>
  )
}

// Step 2: Export a page query

> export const query = graphql`

Reviewer: No strong opinion on this so your choice:

The name of the variable (in this case `query`) can be any name so it mustn't be `query`. In case you wanted to mention this

Author: Good idea, I'll add a note about that in the follow-up PR!

>   query HomePageQuery {

Reviewer: We can drop the name here again

Author: ```suggestion
  query {
```

    site {
      siteMetadata {
        description
      }
    }
  }
`

export default HomePage
```

</Collapsible>

Follow the steps below to add a list of post filenames to your blog page.

1. Import the `graphql` tag from the Gatsby package.

```js:title=src/pages/blog.js
import * as React from 'react'
import { graphql } from 'gatsby' // highlight-line
import Layout from '../components/layout'

const BlogPage = () => {
  return (
    <Layout pageTitle="My Blog Posts">
      <p>My cool posts will go in here</p>
    </Layout>
  )
}

export default BlogPage
```

2. Define and export your page query. Copy over the query you built in GraphiQL.

<Announcement style={{marginBottom: "1.5rem"}}>

> **Note:** Query names need to be unique, so update the default from `MyQuery` to something more descriptive.

Reviewer: ^

Author: ```suggestion
**Note:** By default, the query you build in GraphiQL will have a query name, like `MyQuery`. You may see an error if you have more than one query with the same name, so after you copy your query over from GraphiQL to your component, delete the name (as in the code example below).
```

</Announcement>

```js:title=src/pages/blog.js
import * as React from 'react'
import { graphql } from 'gatsby'
import Layout from '../components/layout'

const BlogPage = () => {
  return (
    <Layout pageTitle="My Blog Posts">
      <p>My cool posts will go in here</p>
    </Layout>
  )
}

// highlight-start
export const query = graphql`

>   query BlogPageQuery {

Reviewer: ^

Author: ```suggestion
  query {
```

    allFile {
      nodes {
        name
      }
    }
  }
`
// highlight-end

export default BlogPage
```

3. Add in `data` prop to the function definition. Then map over the `nodes` array and render the filename for each of your posts.

```js:title=src/pages/blog.js
import * as React from 'react'
import { graphql } from 'gatsby'
import Layout from '../components/layout'

const BlogPage = ({ data }) => { // highlight-line
  return (
    <Layout pageTitle="My Blog Posts">
      {/* highlight-start */}
      <ul>
      {
        data.allFile.nodes.map(node => (
          <li key={node.name}>
            {node.name}
          </li>
        ))
      }
      </ul>
      {/* highlight-end */}
    </Layout>
  )
}

export const query = graphql`

>   query BlogPageQuery {

Reviewer: ^

Author: ```suggestion
  query {
```

    allFile {
      nodes {
        name
      }
    }
  }
`

export default BlogPage
```

<Announcement style={{marginBottom: "1.5rem"}}>

**Syntax Hint:** In JavaScript, arrays have a built-in [`.map()` method](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/map), which you can use to iterate over the elements in the array.

`.map()` takes in a function, which it runs on each element in the array. In the code block above, you're using `.map()` to loop over each of the nodes in `data.allFile.nodes` and return a React element that wraps the node's `name` in an `<li>` element.

In React, when you use the `.map()` method to render a list of elements, you should give each element in the list a unique `key` prop. This helps React keep track of what values have changed and need to be rerendered. For more on rendering lists in React, check out the [React Docs: Lists and Keys](https://reactjs.org/docs/lists-and-keys.html).

</Announcement>

4. Now, when you look at your blog page in a web browser, you should see a list with the filenames for each of your posts:

> ![](./blog-page-with-post-filenames.png)

Reviewer: Missing alt text

Author: Oops! Thanks for catching that 😬 

```suggestion
![A screenshot of the blog page in a web browser. Under the heading "My Blog Posts", there's a bulleted list of the post filenames: "another-post", "my-first-post", and "yet-another-post".](./blog-page-with-post-filenames.png)
```
